the health Ministry in the Israeli
occupied West Bank says a Palestinian
man died during an overnight raid on
ramala which is the seat of the
Palestinian Authority fuel bombs were
thrown at Israeli military vehicles a
United Nations report warns the human
rights situation in the territory is
rapidly deteriorating it urges Israel to
end what the report refers to as
unlawful killings
there opinion polls show Palestinian
support for Hamas is growing in the West
Bank they o indicate the Palestinian
Authority which governs the area is
losing
support a pro Hamas rally in the
occupied West Bank for years few people
in the Palestinian territory supported
the group which is recognized as a
terrorist organization by the EU and the
US three months of War have changed
that in September support for Hamas was
just 12% in the West Bank and 38% in
Gaza but in December that support Rose
to 44% in the West Bank and 42% in Gaza
the polling in Gaza was conducted by
Palestinian political scientist Khal
shikaki mainly in person during the
ceasefire earlier this month reaching
people by telephone in the besieged
territory is almost
impossible the poll also shows that
Mahmud abas the leader of the
Palestinian Authority which officially
governs the West Bank is extremely
unpopular only 11% approve of him
meanwhile the war has also brought in
increase in tensions and violence
between Israeli Security Forces settlers
and Palestinians in the West Bank
further radicalizing the population
there many of whom see gazin as Heroes
and say Hamas was right to attack
Israel the US has said it envisions a
post-war future where the Palestinian
Authority governs Gaza but as Hamas
gains popularity the idea of a Gaza run
by the PA seems less and less VI
viable your tman joins us from the
international crisis group it assists
policy makers on conflict prevention
your support for hammas tell us more
about these latest
polls there is not really anything
surprising about the poll results uh
because we've been seeing since October
7th a spike in popularity for Hamas in
the West Bank in Gaza it's very hard to
gauge at the moment because of the
conditions there at the moment but um
what we've seen is that um and I think
what what we need to understand is that
in situations of war between Israel and
Palestinians the the group that stands
up to Israeli violence uh from their
perspective uh is going to uh always
become more popular than any group that
doesn't so at the moment the Palestinian
Authority uh which was anyway losing
support for its poor governance um is
not getting any public support for its
current stands which is to say nothing
whereas Hamas is actually fighting
Israel and that is hugely popular among
the Palestinian public but if you look
at uh situations of non-war and just
military occupation which has been going
on for 56 years uh then uh Hamas has
less popularity because as a governing
group um people distrust its IDE or many
people distrust its ideology
and as a governing group where was Hamas
in the polls before this war
started well in it was only a governing
group in Gaza of course not in the West
Bank where it was an opposition um and
in Gaza it was also losing popularity
because it couldn't really actually
govern the Gaza Strip under an Israeli
Siege um and uh for any a number of
other reasons when you see governments
throughout the region not particularly
affected
at providing services to their people
Hamas was facing popular demonstrations
against its poor record of governance in
Gaza in the past year for example so
would you say these figures are a flash
in the pan that this is a a win as far
as the polls go for the underdog but um
looking back to the October 7 uh
terrorist attacks uh how does that throw
a light on things for the
group no it's it's not it's not for the
underdog it's it's because Palestinians
generally reject the Israeli occupation
which is extremely brutal and has been
going on for 56 years and so they St
they support anyone who is willing to
put their lives on the line in order to
get rid of that occupation and today
it's Hamas tomorrow it could be someone
else in fact an entire population in
Gaza is being radicalized right now um
and so it could and in the past it was
the PLO now um so that is what the
determines things and people
unfortunately don't look at the methods
used in fighting an illegal occupation
by Israel just like Israel doesn't look
at the means that it is using in the
assault on Gaza they're only looking at
the end result and in the notion of a
just War just as it is uh a just a right
to fight against the military occupation
but the means used like on October 7th
targeting civilians is unconscionable
but that doesn't really enter into the
population of many people Y where does
all of this then leave the Palestinians
at the end of the
day well with much greater destruction
uh certainly of the Gaza Strip um and a
deep deep fear that they will be
expelled both from the Gaza Strip and
from the occupied West Bank into Jordan
that is where they are today and at the
moment with the current government in
Israel seeing no no being unprepared to
move toward a political solution to the
Israeli pales inian conflict it is very
hard to see a way out other than through
continued violence and occupation in
both the West Bank and the Gaza STP your
man from the international crisis group
thank you very much for being on DW
news
cheers for more we're joined Now by
journalist ham baloa ham reported from
the Gaza Strip for more than a decade
he's now in Jordan's capital Aman ham
tell us more about the growing support
for H in the West Bank what are the main
factors behind
that it's not easy to judge um uh
currently um because despite all the
blls of course it's obvious that the
popularity of Hamas in in the West Bank
is increasing and the popularity of PA
is decreasing uh but it's important to
mention that the last election was held
in the Palestinian territories was 2006
and Hamas won that election or the
majority of the seats of the Parliament
um one of the main uh reason that is
Hamas is gaining um uh popularity is the
vision um which is we are talking about
two two visions about Palestine two
Rivals fat is believing in peace process
as the way to establish the Palestinian
State while Hamas believing in armed
struggle as the way um while there is a
de block of the peace process so the
other side is G
talk to us about the Palestinian
Authority uh it has suffered a dramatic
loss of trust among Palestinians in the
West Bank any ideas why that
is well this is not recent um as I just
mentioned that the PA lost or fat lost
the election in 2006 because of many
reasons um um the main reason is the
political one second is the economy um
is not able to pay the salaries because
of Israeli deductions of the the
Palestinian money or the taxes that
delivered to the Palestinian Authority
um Israeli um daily encourages last
night there were uh several Israeli
incence across the West Bank rala
included um Janine hion Bim toim other
cities um um daily arrests um the
Palestinian people in in the West Bank
don't see that the ba or fat is doing
enough to protect them or to feed them
so what do all do this leave Gaza and
its and its people the Israeli military
won't let Hamas retain power there but
gazin would not welcome the Palestinian
Authority there
either that's the question it's not easy
to say and to talk about Gaza right now
if you ask people on the ground from
Gaza currently they would say we would
we would see um anybody but we need the
war to be over this is the main need
they want um in Gaza they don't see the
PA or fat uh um as a Survivor because or
res rescuer because um they suffered
from them I mean um Hamas won the
election before Hamas were uh was there
for 17 years Hamas is deep and and close
to them and they have it's an
ideological movement they work hardly
close to the people while fat and the PA
abandoned Gaza many people um or public
servants despite that the ba kept uh
paying their salaries the the ones who
used to work before Hamas took over in
2007 but uh uh uh many of them they were
fired or uh their salaries were deducted
uh over the years so um they didn't see
that that fat is doing enough for them
and um as a rival so I would summary it
up that the the the gain of power of
Hamas one of the main factors that the
absence of the Rival and fat didn't fill
that
Gap ham thank you very much that was
Palestinian journalist ham
baloa thank
you